---
layout: post
title: Cryptocurrency has Reincentivized Cybercrime
tags: [Industry Insight, Economics]
---
Think about getting mugged on the sidewalk with an empty wallet. No cash. Your
credit cards, ID, and loyalty cards get stolen. Assuming that no physical or
lasting emotional harm has been done, do you care? Each of these items are
easily cancelled or replaced. Your life is not ruined. This scenario has been
the norm in cybercrime until now, and people have been appropriately apathetic.
If breaches are so common, and data stolen has no tangible impact on your life
outside of a vague risk of identity theft, why bother spending time on a good
password? Just keep an eye on your credit card statement and move on. No
wonder the average user is apathetic about security. Their wallets are empty.

The currency of stolen data in general has experienced high inflation in the
last decade. An oversupply has driven down the cost of leaked records and login
information on the dark web. End users have grown apathetic to further breaches
because they figure their data is already out there. This apathy has caused
security professionals to grow increasingly frustrated as the perceived value
of security solutions decrease. This trend is about to reverse completely, for
one reason: digital gold demands more security than personally identifiable
information.

Information Security professionals are in the business of protecting digital
assets, and digital money has just been invented. Let that sink in for a
moment. The game has changed. Now there is cash for our proverbial mugger to
steal. Tangible loss of scarce, irreplaceable digital assets is now a real
risk. Fraud detection systems do not exist to monitor transactions; consumers
are not protected, and criminals are not hindered. Digital coins are also easy
to launder thanks to privacy-centric coins like Monero. Thanks to
cryptocurrencies, the stakes for cybercrime have been increased dramatically:
fail to protect your wallet, and thieves will empty it immediately before
laundering it at market value through a privacy coin. Instant, untraceable
theft, and no authority can freeze your account or issue a chargeback.

We may be underestimating the impact of this paradigm shift on the Information
Security industry. Yes, stealing money via cybercrime has been possible for
some time, but the margins were much slimmer. Stolen credit cards have fraud detection
systems tracking each transaction, and cards can be frozen automatically or
cancelled with a phone call if a theft is detected. Laundering stolen credit is
difficult, expensive, and risky as well: one careless purchase and the merchant
will have law enforcement waiting for you in the parking lot. Wire fraud and
online banking hacks are similarly difficult, requiring technical skill and
evasion of fraud detection systems as well as a "hot" bank account where funds
can eventually be liquidated. Cash withdrawn in this manner is trackable via
serial numbers, and those hot bank accounts are easily disabled. In short,
digital heists pre-cryptocurrency were economically impractical. It got to the
point where scammers spent their time convincing people to buy BestBuy gift
cards in order to send them money. The baddies were really scraping the bottom of the
barrel.

Now, criminals are flocking to cryptocurrencies in droves. Ransomware is on the
rise. Viruses are more profitable because the host machine can mine
cryptocurrency. Systems holding large amounts of digital tokens are juicier
targets than systems holding credit card numbers or passwords; exchange hacks
are occuring at a high rate. Phishing attacks are very straightforward now: no
more convincing people to buy Best Buy gift cards to pay you, just have them
send some Etherium at the click of a button before the sense of panic and
urgency wears off. The baddies moved quickly, and the community is taking
notice.

As a result, apathy for security in the cryptocurrency community is practically
nonexistent. Everyone with a digital wallet seems concerned about keeping it
safe. This scenario is a novelty for security professionals: people genuinely
care about their security now because money is on the line. Far more than
personally identifiable information is at stake. Demand for security awareness
will increase from the bottom up as adoption increases; we won't have to force
feed end users pedantic lessons about password security any more.  Anecdotally,
I have had friends seek my advice regarding the security of the digital
currency that they own. In my entire life I don't remember anyone proactively
seeking security advice from me. Security used to be an annoying obstacle, now
it's a necessity. Anyone with a digital wallet will want to avoid getting
mugged.




Highway robbery is now possible on the information superhighway, and we are the
sheriffs who must rise to the occasion to protect weary travelers.

The amount of Social Security Numbers, credit card numbers, and medical records
for sale on the dark web have increased dramatically in recent years. This
oversupply has driven down the cost of each piece of stolen data. The currency
of stolen data has experienced high inflation.The Equifax breach, arguably a
doomsday scenario for identity theft, is hardly talked about anymore. Criminals
are being paid less and less for this data, and we are paying it less and less
attention. Nobody cares. If some of our most highly-protected data is
frequently stolen, why bother spending time and money protecting it? Apathy is
high among end users and corporate executives alike. Budgeting for Information
Security is an annoyingly vague risk analysis task. What’s the cost of someone
stealing my username and password?

Not much. At least, that’s the perception of the average internet user.
Security practitioners are perpetually trying to spread awareness to apathetic
users, but the message often falls on deaf ears. And maybe it should. I can’t
shake the feeling that security professionals oversell the risks involved with
data protection on a daily basis. Every problem is critical, every virus is a
threat, every security department is lacking budget, and every vendor is
selling you the Next Greatest Security Solution. Hackers are out to get you!
Abreach will cost your company millions! Have we become sophists, shilling our
wares by leveraging fear in those who trust our expertise?

The Information Security industry has thus become inflated on both sides of the
demand curve: professionals are overselling the risks, and criminals are paying
less for the goods. The currency of stolen data has been devalued.

I predict that with the advent of cryptocurrencies, we are now entering a
period of rapid deflation. Remote access trojans used to be used for creating
botnets for inexpensive denial of service attacks; now they can leverage stolen
computer resources at maximum load, 24/7, to mine cryptocurrencies. Stolen bank
account balances used to be sold for pennies on the dollar because laundering
is prohibitively risky and expensive for thieves; stolen cryptocurrencies can
be laundered perfectly at market value with decentralized atomic swaps for
privacy coins like Monero. Private key infrastructure used to be deployed and
carefully guarded by system administrators simply because they secure SSL keys
and employee emails; now public key infrastructure will secure wallets, cash
flow, tangible asset deeds, and securities. In each of the cases above, the
latter is orders of magnitudes more valuable than the former. Data will be much
more valuable to criminals and worth protecting for companies. Deflation!

Some have said that 2018 will be the year of tokenized securities exchanges. We
will be able to buy and sell shares, bonds, or options in a decentralized
manner without a central brokerage or stock exchange. Think about what doors
that will open for cybercriminals. We hear about data breaches all the time;
usernames and passwords have been stolen… again. Yawn. When’s the last time you
heard of a hedge fund collapsing because an anonymous intruder liquidated all
of their holdings overnight and sold them instantly for market value in Monero
before disappearing like a ghost? Or a senior citizen’s retirement fund being
liquidated anonymously overnight because they left their computer unlocked in
the nursing home? Or a corporate executive insider trading through a private
token exchange in such a way that the trade can never be traced back to them?
We are opening Pandora's Box here.

As the value of data and scarce digital assets rapidly deflate, we are running
headlong into a golden age of cybercrime. Frictionless decentralized token
theft and anonymous laundering, coupled with a lack of fraud detection and
regulatory firms overseeing transactions, will lead to a boom in cybercrime. We
are also racing towards a world where risk analysis in Information Security
will become incredibly tangible for once. A compromised endpoint will cost as
much as the tokens it controls and whatever its data can be ransomed for. Smart
contracts will provide guarantees of decryption on payment, so this new dark
economy will be efficient as well. The Information Security industry will need
to put our money where our mouth is. Our current sophistical salesmanship will
quickly be uprooted by an authentic demand to protect digital currency and
other scarce digital assets.

Buckle up. 
