---
layout: post
title: Cryptocurrency has Reincentivized Cybercrime
tags: [Industry Insight, Macroeconomic Trends]
---
Think about getting mugged on the sidewalk with only an empty wallet on your
person, which the mugger simply takes and runs away with. No cash. Your credit
cards, ID, and loyalty cards get stolen. Assuming that no physical or lasting
emotional harm has been done, is it the end of the world? Each of these items
can be cancelled or replaced. You lose time cancelling and replacing them,
sure, and you'll have to spend some money replacing some of the cards along
with your fancy RFID-blocking bifold, but your life is far from ruined. No
wonder the average user is apathetic about security. On the web, their wallets
are empty. Some data, but no cash.

This "empty wallet" scenario has been the norm in cybercrime until recently, and
people have been <i>appropriately</i> apathetic. If breaches are so common, and stolen
data has no tangible impact on your life outside of the vague risk of identity
theft, why bother spending time on a good password? Just keep an eye on your
credit card statement and move on. This sentiment is familiar to many
Information Security professionals who aim to promote security among end users.
Security awareness feels forced; we have to talk people into caring about the
risks, which often ends up sounding a lot like scare-mongering. "Password reuse
is incredibly risky", we say. "Hackers are out to get you", we say. Why is it
so hard to get people to listen? If I'm honest, maybe it's because following
security advice often takes more effort than it's worth. The only impact I see
from a lack of security awareness in my friend group is the occasional Facebook
post: "My account got hacked, don't open messages you got from me." What's the
big deal?

Herein lies some cognitive dissonance: there is a large disconnect between
Information Security professionals and the average user about how big of a deal
security is. This disconnect continues into the workplace, where data breaches
are a more realistic threat but users remain apathetic. What's missing? Maybe
users simply don't value their data enough to protect it. Maybe when the trite
response of "I have nothing to hide" is rolled out, what a user really means is
"if I lose this data it won't cost me anything". Instead of rolling out yet
another refutation by counterexample of the "I have nothing to hide" argument,
we should simply listen to users: they are telling us that their personal data
isn't very valuable. And, if I'm honest, there is truth in that message. All
they have is an empty wallet. A recent behavioural shift in cybercrime tells me
that criminals agree with this valuation.

In economic terms, the currency of stolen user data in general has experienced
high inflation in the last decade. Criminals can only make so much money
stealing information from empty wallets. An oversupply has driven down the
marginal cost of leaked records and login information on the dark web. End
users may have grown even more apathetic to future breaches because they
figure that their data is already out there. This apathy has caused security
professionals to grow increasingly frustrated as the perceived value of
security solutions decrease. Stolen data has dropped in value from both the
supply side and the demand side.

<b>This trend is about to reverse completely, for one reason: digital currency is
worth more than personally identifiable information. Information Security
professionals are in the business of protecting digital assets, and digital
money has just been invented. Let that sink in for a moment.</b>

The game has changed. Now there is cash for our proverbial mugger to steal.
Tangible loss of scarce, irreplaceable digital assets is now a real risk. Fraud
detection systems do not yet exist to monitor these transactions; consumers are
not protected, and criminals are not hindered. Gone are the days of selling
batches of thousands of stolen credit card numbers for pennies on the dollar
because they are so hard to actually use; digital coins are easy to launder
thanks to unregulated exchanges and privacy-centric coins like Monero.
Cryptocurrency-funded ransomware is already the norm. Viruses are now more
profitable because the host machine's computing resources can mine
cryptocurrency instead of only being used as a network resource for wholesale
DDoS attacks. Phishing scams that used to walk users through convoluted Best
Buy gift card purchases now have a frictionless method for being sent money.
The incentive structure for cybercrime is changing, and it's changing quickly.

Thanks to cryptocurrencies, the stakes for falling victim to cybercrime have
increased dramatically for end users: fail to protect your wallet, and thieves
will empty it immediately before laundering its contents at market value
through a privacy coin. Game over. There is no number you can call to cancel
the transaction that emptied your wallet, and no authority you can call to
replace the stolen goods.

As a result, apathy for security in the cryptocurrency community is practically
nonexistent. Everyone with a digital wallet seems concerned about keeping it
safe. This scenario is a novelty for Information Security professionals: the
average user genuinely cares about their security now. Why? Because, for the
first time, their money is directly on the line; their wallets are no longer
empty. For the first time, security awareness is seeing an <i>organic growth in
demand from end users</i>. This rise in demand makes sense, since far more than
personally identifiable information is at stake. <b>I have yet to hear someone
say "I have nothing to hide" when discussing the security of their
cryptocurrency wallet.</b> This organic demand for security awareness will only
increase with adoption. Anecdotally, I have already had friends seek my advice
regarding the security of digital currency that they own or hope to buy. Never
in my entire life have my friends proactively asked me for security advice in a
non-professional setting before cryptocurrency enterred the scene. 

We shouldn't underestimate the impact of this paradigm shift on the Information
Security industry. The internet is often referred to as a Wild West by security
professionals, but it was missing something: digital bank robberies. Butch
Cassidy. Now that there is digital cash to steal, we are truly in a Wild
West. The incentives have made it so.
