---
layout: post
title: Cryptocurrency has Reincentivized Information Security
# feature-img: "assets/img/pexels/desk-messy.jpeg"
tags: [Industry Insight, Macroeconomic Trends]
---

Think about getting pickpocketed on the sidewalk but only losing an "empty"
wallet. No cash. Only your credit cards, ID, and loyalty cards get stolen. Is
it the end of the world? Each of these items can be cancelled or replaced. You
spend time cancelling and replacing them, sure, and you'll have to spend some
money replacing some of the cards along with your fancy RFID-blocking bifold,
but your life is far from ruined. Information Security folks spend a lot of
time trying to get people to care about their online security, but no wonder
the average user is apathetic: on the web, their wallets are empty. Some data,
but no cash.

Privacy is a concern, of course, but more people care about money. Or rather,
people are directly incentivized to care about money. If I'm being honest,
"lack of incentive" encapsulates the average user response to security
initiatives pretty well. This sentiment is familiar to many Information
Security professionals who aim to promote security among end users. Security
awareness feels forced; we have to talk people into caring about the risks,
which often ends up sounding a lot like scare-mongering. "Hackers are out to
get you", we say. Why is it so hard to get people to listen? 

Maybe it's because following security advice often takes more effort than it's
worth.

Stolen credit card numbers go for only [$30 on the dark
web](https://www.mcafee.com/hk/about/news/2015/q4/20151015-01.aspx). Last time
I checked, I can spend way more than thirty bucks with my credit card. [People
spend more money on RFID-blocking
wallets](https://www.amazon.com/s/ref=nb_sb_noss_2?url=search-alias%3Daps&field-keywords=rfid+wallet).
Why is stolen credit so inexpensive? In short, stolen credit is hard to use.
Fraud detection and alerting systems are watching credit card accounts for
suspicious activity, and the card can be frozen at the first sign of trouble.
These security measures directly mitigate a lot of financial risk for the
consumer. As a result, the end consumer feels relatively safe and isn't
incentivized to spend time and effort being extra careful when online shopping.

Bank accounts have a similar markdown: [$2200 accounts are sold for
$190](https://www.mcafee.com/hk/about/news/2015/q4/20151015-01.aspx). Bundle
that with a stolen credit card and a user's most precious digital accounts are
worth a <i>tenth</i> of the price of a [decade-old Honda Civic with 200000
kms](http://www.autotrader.ca/valuations/#?make=2000358&model=2044205&year=3513244&km=200000&local=N2J2K3&trim=3873406&mode=3&condition=0).
To quote my college buddy who recently parked such a car in a run-down
neighbourhood, "who would steal that?"

Maybe when the trite response of "I have nothing to hide" is rolled out, what a
user really means is "if I lose this data, it won't cost me very much". Instead
of producing yet another refutation by counterexample of the "I have nothing
to hide" argument taken at face value (<i>yawn</i>), maybe the Information
Security industry should simply listen to the users: they are telling us that
their personal data isn't very valuable. And, if I'm honest, there is truth in
that message. All they have is an empty wallet. No cash. The black market for
stolen data tells us the value: a few bucks per credit card number. Big whoop.
Breach after breach, more and more of this data floods the black market. Users
who assume that their data is already out there will value their data even
less, and criminals will make less money by selling it. The former is what the
Information Security industry has started calling ["breach
fatigue"](https://sector.ca/why-we-must-fight-breach-fatigue/). I call it
economics. An increasing supply of data breaches keeps lowering the unit cost
of stolen user data on both the supply side and the demand side of the market.

<b>This trend is about to reverse completely, for one reason: digital currency
is worth far more than personally identifiable information and financial
account log-ins. A $2200 digital currency wallet is worth $2200.</b>

Information Security professionals are in the business of protecting digital
assets, and digital money has just been invented. Let that sink in for a
moment.

The game has changed. Now there is cash for our proverbial pickpocket to
pilfer. Scarcity now exists in the world of stolen data. Cryptocurrency is
a deflationary asset in the black market, too.

Tangible loss of irreplaceable digital assets is now a real risk for individual
users. As a result, apathy for security in the cryptocurrency community is
practically nonexistent. Everyone with a digital wallet seems appropriately
concerned about keeping it safe. Message boards pass around security advice to
new users because it is essential, and too many people have learned those
lessons the hard way already. This scenario is a novelty for Information
Security professionals: the average user genuinely cares about their security
now. For the first time, security awareness is seeing an <i>organic growth in
demand from end users</i>. This rise in demand makes sense, since more than
just a few dollars worth of personal information is at stake. <b>I have yet to
hear anybody say "I have nothing to hide" when discussing the security of their
cryptocurrency wallet.</b> This organic demand for security awareness will only
increase with adoption.

Anecdotally, I have already had friends seek my advice regarding the security
of digital currency that they own or hope to buy. Never in my entire life have
my friends proactively asked me for security advice in a non-professional
setting before cryptocurrency entered the scene. (Probably because their $2000
used Civic is worth ten times more than their financial accounts on the dark
web.)

Consumers are exposed, and the baddies smell opportunity. Fraud detection
systems do not yet exist to monitor cryptocurrency transactions, so criminals
are not hindered. Gone are the days of selling batches of thousands of stolen
credit card numbers for pennies on the dollar because they are so hard to
actually use; digital coins are now easy to launder thanks to
[unregulated](https://www.forbes.com/sites/rogeraitken/2018/02/15/u-s-cftc-commissioner-says-cryptocurrency-exchanges-adopting-self-regulation-could-spur-standards/#7a18509645e1)
(or completely
[decentralized](https://coinsutra.com/best-decentralized-exchanges-dex/))
exchanges as well as [privacy-centric
coins](https://www.bitcoinbeginner.com/blog/privacy-coin-comparison/) like
Monero. [Cryptocurrency-funded
ransomware](https://www.us-cert.gov/ncas/alerts/TA14-295A) is already the norm.
[Viruses](https://antivirus.comodo.com/blog/comodo-news/detect-remove-bitcoin-miner-virus/)
are now more profitable because the host machine's computing resources can mine
cryptocurrency instead of only being used as a network resource for wholesale
DDoS attacks. [Phishing
scams](https://www.coindesk.com/copycat-twitter-accounts-seek-to-scam-crypto-users/)
that used to walk users through [convoluted Best Buy gift card
purchases](https://corporate.bestbuy.com/best-buy-warns-gift-card-scam/) now
have a frictionless method for being sent money.  Traders who likely have
significant holdings may be hit with [targeted
attacks](https://twitter.com/PhilakoneCrypto/status/967224205438865409)\*. See
a trend? The incentive structure for cybercrime is changing, and it's changing
quickly.

Thanks to cryptocurrencies, the stakes for falling victim to cybercrime have
increased dramatically for end users: fail to protect your wallet, and thieves
will empty it immediately before laundering its contents at market value
through a privacy coin. Game over. There is no number you can call to cancel
the transaction that emptied your wallet, and no authority you can call to
replace the stolen goods.

We shouldn't underestimate the impact of this paradigm shift on the Information
Security industry as cryptocurrency adoption continues. The internet is often
referred to as a Wild West by security professionals, but it was missing
something: [digital bank
robberies](http://storeofvalueblog.com/posts/cryptocurrency-hacks-so-far-august-24th/).
Now that there is digital cash to steal, we are truly in a Wild West. The
incentives have made it so.

----

<span class="footnote">\*I am speculating on the targeted nature of the linked incident. Targeted
attack or not, prolific traders should see this incident as a cautionary tale.</span>
